Add birthday celebration and recap blog (#343)
trinodb/trino.io: _posts/2022-09-08-tenth-birthday-celebration-recap.md

margin-bottom:5px; max-width: 100%;" allowfullscreen="">
</iframe>

## Birthday celebration with the creators of Trino

To cap things off last month, we hosted a meetup with the creators to reflect
on the last ten years, laugh and listen to some stories from the early days,
talk about the exciting features currently launching, and speculate on the next
ten years of Trino. Here are some highlights you missed:

### Adding dynamic catalogs

Dain discusses what dynamic catalogs could look like in Trino. Currently, to add
catalogs in Trino, you need to add the new catalog configuration file and then
restart Trino. With dynamic catalogs, you can add and remove these catalogs at
runtime with no restart required. There is still no guarantee of exactly when
this feature would arrive, but some of the foundations are currently being 
added. <a href="https://www.youtube.com/clip/UgkxkYmwM6gmw9-GceMUb5IxqIKm0qNXt3fY" target="_blank"> 
<i class="fab fa-youtube" style="color: red;"></i> Dain dives into this a bit
more in this clip</a>

### Vectorization and performance

> As more marketing around vectorized databases have come up recently many have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As more marketing around vectorized databases has come up recently many have
```

asked if Trino will be following the trend. This question comes up at an

> interesting time as [Trino supports and will soon require Java 17 to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interesting time as [Trino now requires Java 17 to 
```

* Could we rewrite the [Google Sheets connector]({{site.url}}/docs/current/connector/googlesheets)
  as a table function?.
  [<i class="fab fa-youtube" style="color: red;"></i>
  David and Dain discuss how this would work](https://www.youtube.com/clip/UgkxKIhplQHgEULQkSrjKs4M5w8oNdQMJaoL){:target="_blank"}
* Why table functions are so incredibly powerful.
  [<i class="fab fa-youtube" style="color: red;"></i>
  Eric and Dain talk about why PTFs are a game changer](https://www.youtube.com/clip/UgkxQcokpdgPjiuMKMC5-3HwHvlbmZjxAvxe){:target="_blank"}

If you want to learn more about polymorphic table functions, check out the
recent [Trino Community Broadcast episode]({{site.url}}/episodes/38.html) that
covers the potential of these functions in much more detail.

### The early days of Presto and Trino

We wanted to get some insight into what the early days of the project looked
like, and how Martin, Dain, David, and Eric began the daunting task of designing
and building a distributed query engine from scratch. Some of the discussions
were interesting while others were downright hilarious. Here are some steps you

> can take to write your own query engine...at least if you want to do it the way

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can take to write your own query engine, at least if you want to do it the way
```

the Trino creators did it:

1. Look up a bunch of research papers to see how others are doing this 📑.
  [<i class="fab fa-youtube" style="color: red;"></i>
  Video](https://www.youtube.com/clip/gkxGjPYZRx8rhtAndyho7AZgsM4e9wG9Jt4){:target="_blank"}
    * Side note: Papers tend to be highly aspirational and skip important fundamentals.
      [<i class="fab fa-youtube" style="color: red;"></i>
      Video](https://www.youtube.com/clip/Ugkx6Hqe5iglsTgrR9hVo9U3ITi8LSxxMu4U){:target="_blank"}
1. Address the real challenges of making a query engine.
  [<i class="fab fa-youtube" style="color: red;"></i>
  Video](https://www.youtube.com/clip/Ugkx57PezuXyRWHrxxxoLaKni6jqFZ-StwY-){:target="_blank"}
1. Take your initial version and just throw it away 😂🗑🚮.
  [<i class="fab fa-youtube" style="color: red;"></i>
  Video](https://www.youtube.com/clip/UgkxJz7zve36QJZZDdtC3S29vI-Ak1jRifAH){:target="_blank"}

> 1. Expand outside the initial use cases at Facebook by learning from other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Expand outside the initial use cases by learning from other
```

  companies and building community 👥.
  [<i class="fab fa-youtube" style="color: red;"></i>
  Video](https://www.youtube.com/clip/UgkxQrBl0BzOrjvwDcEN4KAAyqehcRUc1tsf){:target="_blank"}
1. Cause a [brownout](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brownout_(software_engineering))
  on the Facebook network 📉.
  [<i class="fab fa-youtube" style="color: red;"></i>
  Video](https://www.youtube.com/clip/Ugkx6SyQTFgwX_kdeH018VGt2pMUbldvuKtC){:target="_blank"}

> 

Reviewer: remove empty line

1. Realize the system you replaced was actually faster in some cases, but
  for all the wrong reasons ❌🙅.
  [<i class="fab fa-youtube" style="color: red;"></i>
  Video](https://www.youtube.com/clip/UgkxTqBY2nMAALn-OkglE5DT9dHlBuC18qf8){:target="_blank"}

> After a lot of the initial work was done, Martin, Dain, David, and Eric finally

Reviewer: This sentence makes no sense.

> paid off. Prest was deployed at Facebook and soon after open sourced. From here,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
paid off. Presto was deployed at Facebook and soon after open sourced. From here,
```

we know that the velocity of the project picked up and once the project was 
independent of Facebook, the features took off even more. While everything may
seem calculated in hindsight, it was a lot of hard work to grow the community
and adoption around Presto and now Trino. The creators knew they were making a 
project that would be utilized outside the walls of Facebook, but
[<i class="fab fa-youtube" style="color: red;"></i>  they could never have 
anticipated the sheer scale of adoption Trino would see](https://www.youtube.com/clip/Ugkxh2J-1bi1rUoBpuld_FAuXYZgz2bvqPPx){:target="_blank"}.

## Conclusion

> We hoped you enjoyed all the fun we had celebrating these first ten years of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope you enjoyed all the fun we had celebrating the first ten years of the
```
